[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
Gaiam "Inspirations."
Wouldn't it be great if you
could work out your brain
like you work out your body?
Well, why not?
Your brain can be exercised like
any other muscle in the body,
but in the case
of neurofeedback,
it's like training the
brain to balance itself
and to self-regulate.
Neurofeedback is
a brain exercise,
and that's what
we're exploring today
with Doctor Siegfried Othmer.
He's the chief
scientist at the EEG
Institute in Woodland Hills.
And Dr. Othmer has been involved
in the development of research
grade instrumentation for
EEG feedback since 1987.
You've been doing this
for quite a long time.
>>DR. SIEGFRIED OTHMER: Right.
>>LISA: So tell me a
little bit about how
you got interested
in neurofeedback
in the first place.
>>OTHMER: It was actually
through our son Brian.
And his problem, even though
he started out normally
enough in life, became
worse at about age seven
when a seizure
disorder developed.
And this is actually
not uncommon
that children develop seizures
first in that kind of age
range-- six through eight.
>>LISA: Was there any
cause a reason for it, or--
>>OTHMER: Well, we think it
relates back to birth injury.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: But then it doesn't
actually show up until later.
In this case, the issue,
however, wasn't just seizures.
Once the seizures had been
identified, that, of course,
became the focus.
But as a matter of fact,
he had behavioral problems
all over the place, and he was a
very difficult child to manage.
And the neurologist was,
of course, just interested
in the seizures.
But we had to live
with him, and we
realized the problems
were much bigger.
He was thrown out of school
for behavioral issues.
He got into fights and so forth.
And this was very strange,
because he himself very greatly
disapproved of his own behavior.
In other words, he didn't
want to behave that way.
So--
>>LISA: He didn't understand it.
He couldn't control it.
>>OTHMER: Didn't understand it.
We didn't understand it.
He didn't understand it.
So very clearly,
his behavior was not
implementing his intentions.
In other words, the
behavior was brain based.
It was sort of a
behavioral eruption,
if you will, much like
the seizure itself.
And so we later-- years later--
found out about neurofeedback.
And that really made a
human being out of him.
>>LISA: Did you start to notice
the difference right away?
>>OTHMER: Yes, within
a few sessions.
But being skeptical parents,
we didn't acknowledge-- my wife
and I didn't acknowledge
to each other
that we were, in fact, seeing
changes until a month into it,
someone else said,
Brian is different.
Are you guys doing something?
Well, I says yes, there's
this thing, neurofeedback,
we're trying.
And at that point,
other people--
it was independent validation.
Somebody else had
noticed the change,
so it was OK to talk about.
>>LISA: So anything,
though, that
could help improve the
quality of your lives
is something that's
worth exploring.
So if you saw change happening--
>>OTHMER: Right.
>>LISA: So it was
worth diving into.
>>OTHMER: That encouraged
us to continue.
But that, of course,
was just the beginning.
The first month just
give us an inkling
of what, in fact, was
possible with him.
>>LISA: So what
was the EEG doing?
And what is EEG, for
people that don't know?
>>OTHMER: Well, the EEG is
just the electrical activity
of the brain that
we happen to be
able to see when we put
the electrode on the scalp
and kind of listen
in on the brain.
So it gives us, in a
sense, some visibility
into the neuronal dance.
And the neuronal dance
reflects the good
and the bad of what
the brain is doing.
So it can show us
the seizure activity
and it can show us when
the brain is behaving well.
And we use that information,
then, to train the brain.
>>LISA: Is this the same
thing-- is neurofeedback
the same as biofeedback?
>>OTHMER: Yes and no.
Both neurofeedback and
biofeedback-- they both fall
into the same class of
self-regulation training.
Neurofeedback just
happens to be biofeedback
using the EEG--
using brain waves.
There's a little fancier term--
>>LISA: Neuro verses bio?
There's--
>>OTHMER: Right.
What had happened
is biofeedback sort
of came along in the
'70s-- '60s and '70s.
And it became old hat.
And then along
came neurofeedback.
And we wanted to bring
attention to this new thing,
so we had to call
it something new,
so we called it neurofeedback.
It's really biofeedback.
>>LISA: So you keep
saying self-regulate,
which I find a fascinating
term, because it
means that the brain starts
to become reliant upon itself
and starts to control itself.
How does the neurofeedback
teach it to do that?
Or did I get that right at all?
>>OTHMER: Well, yes.
The thing is that the
brain is, of course,
a self-regulating entity, right?
It controls our activities in
life-- it controls itself--
all by bootstrapping
its own capacities.
It has learned
everything it knows.
So everything that
the brain does,
it does by virtue
of self-regulation.
It got there through
learning its own behavior.
And what we're seeing now
is the shortcomings of that.
So in case of our son
Brian, the seizure activity,
that's a failure of that
self-regulatory process.
The question is, can we then
restore self-regulation?
Can we enhance the brain's
ability to control itself?
And the answer is yes, we can.
So we think of the
brain as naturally
a self-regulating system.
>>LISA: Well, though
it feels, though-- when
you have something like
anxiety or depression
or even out of
control appetite, it
feels like you're
so out of control
and that the brain isn't
self-regulating or controlling
at all.
>>OTHMER: And now we
understand all those problems
as failures in self-regulation--
that, indeed, there's not just
the psychological perspective
of you're feeling anxious.
Yes, there's the
feeling component,
but if we look at the brain,
the brain is acting up.
And now that's directly
accessible to us
through brain training.
In other words, if
we give the brain
information about its own
failures to regulate properly,
it can get itself back into
a state of good regulation.
>>LISA: So this is similar
to what happened to me when
I had-- I had an
accident-- a bike accident
and I damaged a certain
part of my brain.
And I noticed-- I found
this out after-- unconscious
for 30 minutes and left
with the inability to speak,
which I'm still working on.
I went to a
neurologist and found
that there was the
prefrontal cortex of my brain
that was not responding or
sending the signal back as
fast as it-- as the
other parts of my brain.
So--
>>OTHMER: Right.
>>LISA: And it was about 20%
of what the rest of my brain
was doing.
So the neurologist gave me the
diagnosis-- the determination.
But the way that I
actually healed it
was through neurofeedback.
Can you explain how the
neurofeedback re-stimulated
or regrew that part of my brain?
>>OTHMER: Let's use
the word reactivated.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: So it brought--
the nerve feedback exercise
of just the brain seeing
itself in action brought
your frontal lobe back
into the conversation
the way it was supposed to be.
So we can think of the
brain as almost, by analogy,
to a team where different team
members have different roles.
But in this case,
every team member
is actually a huge
platoon of neurons.
So you've got these platoons of
neurons having to coordinate.
And there's some precision
that needs to happen there--
that if there's
slight mismatches,
then things aren't talking to
each other the way they should.
And so in the case
of head injury,
things are almost
working, but not quite.
>>LISA: Nuh-uh.
>>OTHMER: Right?
>>LISA: Right.
>>OTHMER: But it
doesn't take much.
It may feel like you've lost a
whole lot, as indeed you did,
felt like you lost a whole
lot of your former abilities.
But it didn't take much in
the way of a realignment
to bring those back.
Because it's not
like the neurons
are missing-- missing in action.
It's just that
they're not playing
with the rest of the team.
>>LISA: That is incredibly
valuable information,
because most people deal
with brain traumas and brain
injuries and think this is
their sentence for life.
And that you can actually
re-stimulate the team
and those neurons to connect
and reconnect and rebuild
through neurofeedback
is life giving.
>>OTHMER: This is where
medicine has been.
It's basically accepted the
brain malfunctions as a given.
And we nudge it a little
bit with medications.
And anything that medications
can't do, we say we can't do.
And now we say, no, no.
There's this whole other
avenue available to us
of brain training-- of just
actually allowing the brain
to witness its own dance.
And that allows it to
re-coordinate the dance the way
it should be.
>>LISA: Amazing.
Now, how many of your
patients-- what percentage would
you say are children?
>>OTHMER: Oh, right
now in our office--
which is different from what
it used to be-- right now,
it's about a third to
a half of children.
It used to be mostly children.
Mostly, we were dealing with
attention deficit disorder
early on.
Now, we're dealing with a
whole raft of conditions,
and we're seeing
a lot of adults.
In fact, probably the
majority of adults.
>>LISA: So ADD, ADHD, anxiety
in children and adults,
hypertension--
>>OTHMER: Yeah.
>>LISA: Kids on the
spectrum-- autism?
>>OTHMER: Yes.
And with regard to
attention deficit disorder,
medicine has not stood idle.
The medications have
improved, and so forth--
medication strategies
have improved.
So we're not seeing
the child for whom
10 milligrams of Ritalin
solves the problem.
That's not who we're seeing,
where the parent would just
like to get the
kid off of Ritalin.
Those parents exist,
but that's not
what's coming into our practice.
What's coming into
our practice are
people who have much more
severe difficulties than that.
Its major behavior
issues, conduct problems,
oppositionality or sleep issues
or bed wetting or sleepwalking.
>>LISA: Learning disabilities--
>>OTHMER: Learning
disabilities, and so forth.
It's the whole raft of issues.
There's a limited
category of things
where Ritalin might be the
answer for the children.
I mean, much as I--
it is an answer,
even if it's not
the best answer.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: But we're saying
for most children, it's not.
And for many children, even
where Ritalin is the answer,
it's not the best answer,
and they should still
be on the hunt for
something better.
>>LISA: Well, this is
an incredible solution,
because this actually teaches
the brain to regulate itself,
rather than the medication
doing it for it, right? .
>>OTHMER: Right.
So attention deficit disorder
is not the Ritalin deficiency
disease.
It is a deficiency, however,
in self-regulatory capacity.
And now the issue is,
can we restore it?
And the answer is, yes.
>>LISA: I want you to take a
look at a video here of a child
who is on the spectrum and
how EEG has helped this child.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>As a developmental
disorder, the child
has missed out on what
he needed to learn
in that first year of life.
He needed to learn emotional
self-regulation, physical
awareness, how to
interact with the world.
>>Say thank you.
>>Thank you.
>>You're welcome, Josh.
>>See you later.
>>Yeah.
>>Yeah, I'll see you later.
>>Since that right brain that
was maturing in that first year
did not learn how to calm down,
we have now-- even many years
later, we have a right brain
that's sort of on fire.
>>Everything to
this type of brain
is overwhelming, which
is why oftentimes,
autistic individuals like things
to be very routine and very
predictable.
>>There is no real medical
model for treating autism.
I definitely feel that
neurofeedback fills that hole.
>>I'm gonna be a Shamu trainer,
because I like to train Shamu.
>>Somebody get me a fork.
It's got me.
Ow.
Wham.
Wham, wham.
>>Aw.
Thank you, Josh.
You did a great job.
>>It's been such an emotional
roller coaster with him
over the years of having
autism-- going to school,
not going to school.
>>We were told it was gas.
We were told it was-- you
know, she was sensitive
or maybe she was allergic to
certain foods or whatever.
But now we know it was sensory
integration disorder related
to autism.
>>All of a sudden,
I heard a lady yell,
why are you yelling at me?
You shouldn't be yelling
at me, young man.
I looked at her and I said,
is there a problem here?
She goes, your son
was yelling at me,
and I think that's
very disrespectful.
OK.
He's got autism and
he makes noises,
but I don't think he
was yelling at you.
Well, he should wear a sign
or something that says,
I have autism.
>>We like to think
of neurofeedback
as a brain exercise where
we're specifically exercising
the brain's ability to
manage its own states.
So to be calm enough,
to be awake enough,
to be focused enough to do what
you want to do is the goal.
>>It's like brain
yoga, in a way.
There's a stretching
and a strengthening.
This type of brain
exercise, I think,
can really have
a profound effect
on helping people
just feel and function
the way they were meant to.
>>And just like a mother wants
to shape the child's behavior,
we do this one level down, at
the level of brain behavior.
>>Good job.
I know some moms that have
kids that are really autistic
and have a hard time getting
them to bed, getting them
to eat, getting them
up to go to school,
and they haven't
seen neurofeedback.
And I'm glad I found it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Here's how it goes.
At 3:05, the door swings open
and there in the other room
stands Nora.
>>You may come in.
Come along.
What neurofeedback
basically is is
that it's a process whereby
a person is essentially
learning to exercise their
own brain wave activity.
>>Oh, boy.
Oh, boy.
>>And this is a very
non-invasive process,
and it's extremely powerful.
You want to do the
alien ship this time?
>>Mm-hmm.
>>OK.
We'll do that.
What you're doing
is you're sitting
in front of a video screen.
It looks to you
like you're looking
at some kind of video game.
And there are
electrode sensors that
are attached to your scalp.
>>Nora puts some cat
saliva onto my ears
and puts some
cords into my head.
This thing, it feels
like a cat's licking me.
>>I know.
It's kind of gritty and wet.
>>That looks like through time.
>>I was really
afraid when she went
to stick the electrodes
to his scalp.
I was ready to freak out over
that, because he doesn't really
like things touching him.
He responded to
that really well.
>>I select which
game we should play,
either roller ball
or the ship one.
>>The feedback process
is one in which
we show you what
your brain is doing.
And we typically show
you in terms of a game.
So a video-- audio/video
display that proceeds
when your brain calms
down and does not
proceed when you're
not calming down.
So you are step by
step rewarded for going
in a calming direction.
>>The most rewarding
thing is just
seeing how happy
he is and also how
happy the rest of his family is.
It's incredible not
just what neurofeedback
does for individuals, but for
all the people around them.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: All right.
So that video was wonderful
to show us that we have--
that there are solutions
in a wide spectrum
of emotional issues.
What about adults-- adults
with severe depression,
unexplained
anxiety-- those types
of-- where they've been
around for a long time?
>>OTHMER: Well, in
those cases, the brain
has had a longer time in order
to consolidate bad habits.
>>LISA: Train itself.
Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: In fact, this can
be seen as-- understood just
as the downside of
brain plasticity.
Neurofeedback takes advantage
of brain plasticity to heal,
but of course, it's
brain plasticity
that got us in trouble
in the first place.
It's basically the
brain having learned
"bad habits," if you will.
>>LISA: That's what the
plasticity is is the bundles--
neural bundles that form there.
>>OTHMER: Learning
patterns of behavior
that are not necessarily
functional for the person.
Now, that may originally have
had a perfectly sound trigger.
There may, in the past, have
been reasons for the brain
to be anxious and so forth.
But then that
became consolidated,
took on a life of its
own, and now the person
is stuck with it.
But we can still
train the person out
of that-- the depression and
the anxiety and so forth.
And it can, in fact,
happen quite rapidly.
But it may not always
happen rapidly.
It may need to take more
time, because again,
that pattern has
been so consolidated.
>>LISA: So when a trauma
happens or the pattern begins,
does the physical neurons
take place that form a memory?
What do they look like?
Are they little bridges
or bundles in the brain?
>>OTHMER: The neurons
are like little pawns
in a chess board or
little, let's say,
soldiers in the platoon, all
essentially acting alike.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: But they're involved
in different activities
depending on where
they are the brain.
But fundamentally, they all
do kind of the same thing.
They obey the same
rules and so forth.
And that's why our
technique works
with so many different
problems, because we're
dealing with neurons that
play by the same rules
wherever they are and whatever
function they're serving.
So we're concerned
with the group activity
of these neurons--
the group behavior.
And that happens be
exactly what the EEG shows.
It shows us when the neurons
are dancing together.
If they're doing their
own thing-- rogue
neurons-- we don't see it.
But the neuronal dance
can get out of control
and that's what a seizure is.
The seizure is an
extreme example
of the neuronal dance
getting out of control.
>>LISA: I see.
>>OTHMER: But short of that,
we see everything else,
like the anxiety,
depression, and so forth.
All of that can be seen modeled
in terms of deficiencies
in the regulation of this
global neuronal dance--
about 8 and 1/2 billion
parametel neurons
in the cortex.
>>LISA: My god.
You did a great job of
explaining something so complex
and making it very
understandable.
Thank you.
In the case of someone who's
a veteran-- a Vietnam vet
or a war veteran--
who has experienced
severe shock, seen,
definitely visual trauma,
and auditory trauma, and
kinesthetic trauma-- that
registers into so many different
centers of the brain-- can
you-- and I
understand that you've
done a program with Dr.
Daniel Amen and PTSD patients.
How was that effective?
>>OTHMER: Well, first of
all, the thing to realize
is that, again, even though
the consequences of trauma
can be devastating-- just as
was the case with your head
injury-- we're not talking here
about neurons being destroyed.
They're, again,
merely dysfunctional.
And so once again, the
same remedy applies.
We need to recruit these
neuronal assemblies
into doing their
proper dance again.
Now, in trauma
disorders, the problem
has a certain character which
is that the brain is now
expecting adverse events.
It lives in the
trauma condition.
Even though the person may now
have come home from the war
zone and is now sitting
on the couch at home,
that brain is still living
under threat, if you will.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: So it
cannot calm down.
And whereas the rest
of us who happen
to be graced with
functional brains
live actually out of
very calm states-- that
is the defining quality
of good brain function.
>>LISA: Calm states?
>>OTHMER: Being able to
operate out of calm states.
>>LISA: Operate outside of them?
>>OTHMER: No.
That you live in them.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>OTHMER: And you
live in calm states.
And then do you
do what you must,
but you immediately
return to calm states.
>>LISA: OK.
Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: You don't
live very well--
you're not very functional
in agitated states.
Nobody is.
>>LISA: Right.
Got it.
>>OTHMER: So you want to
operate out of calm states.
And so our task for
the traumatized brain
is to reacquaint the
brain with its calm states
to which it has lost access.
>>LISA: Got it.
And so then the cortisol
and the stress hormones
are not releasing.
You're in a place--
>>OTHMER: Right.
That'll all settle
down once we get
the neurons dancing
their normal dance.
>>LISA: Can this be
achieved through meditation?
>>OTHMER: Well,
there is our big hint
of why this is so powerful.
I mean, people who relate
to meditation because that's
so familiar can think
about it in those terms.
So meditation is a way
of calming the brain.
And good things happen when
you're not doing anything.
You're just sitting there
meditating and good things--
we know good things
happen, right?
>>LISA: Right.
>>OTHMER: So what
does that tell you?
That tells you that
deactivating the brain
is actually, for
certain people, the way
to back to health-- back to
good mental function, right.
It's just that with meditation,
it's passive in a sense.
You're giving your brain--
you're taking obstacles
out the way.
And the brain may have the
opportunity to self-heal,
and it may take that
path, but it may not.
>>LISA: But you can't
meditate when you're driving
and when you're having
communication and conversation.
Right.
>>OTHMER: Well, certainly not.
But even if you give the
brain that opportunity,
it may not find its way.
>>LISA: I understand.
>>OTHMER: So with neurofeedback
now, it is an active process.
>>LISA: It guides
it into that, yes.
>>OTHMER: Because now--
my wife Sue Othmer, who's
our chief clinician, she calls
it meditation with handrails.
So basically, it
guides the process
by showing the brain--
essentially giving it
a flashlight to guide
it through its darkness.
>>LISA: Great.
Well, there's a video here
that shows some of the SPECT
scans that Dr. Othmer
did with Daniel Amen
to-- with patients with PTSD.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>In connection with
our work with veterans,
we thought it would
be nice to get
some of the usual
kind of imagery
that is now done
on brain function
in order to document
the progress that we're
making with neurofeedback.
So in this connection, we're
working with Dr. Daniel Amen,
who is known around the
world for this kind of work.
He's looked at SPECT scans for a
variety of clinical conditions,
including for PTSD.
And so when one of our veterans
was willing to do that,
we sent him down there
for some SPECT imagery,
down to Newport Beach.
And after the
neurofeedback, another set.
And we were just really
struck by the difference
that we could see in the data.
Now, we were already
excited about the progress
that he had been making
in the neurofeedback,
but it's ever so much better
to see it in real color--
in living color.
This shows the SPECT imagery.
SPECT stands for Single
Photon Emission Computerized
Tomography.
And it shows us elevations
in activity level
up here at the anterior
cingulate cortex,
at the basal ganglia,
and at the thalamus,
and a whole lot of activity
back here at the cerebellum.
And this pattern--
this diamond pattern--
is the characteristic
pattern that we or Dr. Amen
expect to see typically in the
case of post traumatic stress
disorder.
And this was before
the neurofeedback.
And here we're
seeing the same brain
after a number of
neurofeedback sessions.
So in particular, the
anterior cingulate cortex
has calmed down significantly.
The basal ganglia
have calmed down.
The thalamus is still lively.
But look at the cerebellum.
It has just majorly
decreased in activity level.
And we read that as
being all to the good.
This is a calmer
brain that is more
able to control and
regulate its own activity.
And that's very
much the experience
that this person
has in his life.
He's just more in
charge of his life.
And so the experience
of neurofeedback for him
has been nothing less
than transformational.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I love that,
because you really showed,
on the SPECT scan, the areas
that the brain changed.
You can see this.
Now, you've been
studying this and working
with this type of research
grade EEG for such a long time.
Have you seen that people
are-- that the technology has
improved in any way
or that it's more
effective for one thing
rather than another?
>>OTHMER: Oh,
indeed, the technique
is still under development.
>>LISA: Is it?
>>OTHMER: Right.
So we have new software coming
out several times a year
as new ideas are implemented.
And we're not the
only people who
are innovating in this field.
So there are a variety of
neurofeedback techniques
emerging that have their
individual strengths.
As a matter of
fact, the strength
of our particular
method is really
in application to trauma.
And if we look at the
picture of mental health
in the large and just look at
the whole raft of issues that
afflict people that you
know, so much of that
is traceable to what
happened to these people
in early childhood.
Mental health
professionals know this.
It's just that they can't
do anything about it.
They know it, but
what can you do?
We now, you see, can
do something about it.
Because when we're reshaping
these neuronal networks,
we're, in effect, reaching back
to the early childhood history.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>OTHMER: And altering what,
in the life of the child,
first took a set in the first
couple of years of life.
>>LISA: Back to the
imprint period--
in the unconscious mind,
you can access this.
>>OTHMER: Yes.
Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: Oh, we're
certainly dealing
with the unconscious mind.
We're dealing with very basic
regulatory functions that
are not really under
our conscious control.
They're way beneath
consciousness.
>>LISA: Are you dealing
with the unconscious mind
or are you dealing
with the chemicals
in the brain-- the
actual neurons?
>>OTHMER: Well, the
chemicals, of course--
you can talk
chemistry, you can talk
bio-electric function
and so forth.
They're inseparable.
We're talking-- we're
of course talking
about electrical function
in the brain when
we're talking about neurons.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: But what is the
bearer of electrical charge?
It's chemicals.
It's ions.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: OK.
So you can use whatever
language is convenient.
And for us, since we're
talking frequency and so forth
and electrical transmission
between neurons
and so forth-- the
communication between neurons--
it's really more
convenient for us
to talk in the electrical terms
rather than chemical terms.
But they're equally valid.
>>LISA: I understand.
OK.
Well, the study that you
did with the veterans
and the PTSD veterans
are-- it was a huge study.
And we actually have
a clip here of one
of the veterans talking
about it in his own words.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>15 years in the Marine Corps.
I had previously
enlisted-- crossed over,
picked up a commission
after two years.
I was Marine of the month,
Marine of the quarter,
toured in Iraq three
times, twice in
Fallujah, first time during
the Battle of Fallujah.
The last time, I was
up at a transition team
up at the Port of Walid,
which borders Syria and Iraq.
I realized that what
I was looking for,
as far as profession, the Marine
Corps offered a lot of it.
Coming back the
first time, it was
just-- it seemed like
a lot of confusion.
It was almost as if I was
pulled out from my life plan.
I thought it was kind of
like the jet lag at first.
It just seemed like I
was just tired a lot,
but it seemed to be a
lot more than normal.
10 weeks later, they said
I was going out again.
It was during the holidays
and it just really threw me
for another loop.
Just the calling
my mom and letting
her know that I wasn't
going to make it
home didn't pan out
very well for me.
Yeah, I think the
second time around,
I was just so depressed that
I didn't want to do anything.
Every little decision
became a huge ordeal.
Coming back the third
time, the symptoms
were definitely intensified.
I just felt more
lost, more unfocused.
And things were just a lot more
difficult to deal with-- hits
you like a dark cloud just
smashed you in the face.
It was just horrible.
I wouldn't say I had
difficulty falling asleep,
but I had difficulty
staying asleep.
It just seemed like
I was constantly--
every couple hours, I was awake.
After a while, it
came to a point
where OK, yeah, I'd have
coffee in the morning
and then some in the afternoon.
Just staying awake and aware was
becoming the goal of the day.
>>He seemed kind of down,
like he had depression.
But I wasn't sure
what was going on.
And then when he
came back, he started
talking to me about
some of the supplements
that he was taking,
like the SAM-e.
And he'd been on
antidepressants before.
>>They gave me
Prozac or Welbutrin
and several other ones.
I don't even remember anymore.
I mean, I didn't realize how
screwed up I was getting.
I wouldn't say I
was reckless, but I
was some-- it just seemed
like I didn't care anymore.
Yeah, I realized,
this isn't right.
And of course, I
go see a counselor,
and they say, oh, yeah.
OK.
Well, you might have PTSD.
Then I realized
there was something
that I can do that may be
able to correct the situation.
I was really excited when I
heard about neurofeedback.
It was something new that
I'd never tried before.
I wanted to check it out--
see if that would work.
I mean, for me, it was more
like, what more could I lose?
At Camp Pendelton over
at the Navy hospital,
they were offering it.
It's kind of nice because it was
in the simple little office--
the couches, the desk,
and then the computers.
You got to sit in a nice,
relaxing chair, lean back,
and they put the little
electrodes on your head.
They have a video game
controller that you can use,
as well.
Basically what it
is is you're sitting
in front of a screen
that basically
looks like a video game.
The interesting
thing about it was
when they're programming in
the frequencies just felt
a lot more relaxed.
I'd say probably about on
the fifth treatment or so,
I started noticing
some of the changes--
initially, with driving.
Yeah, I used to be
angry, aggressive.
As soon as I
started taking this,
I noticed I wasn't doing that.
>>I mean, he's able to
communicate a lot better.
Before, he would just kind of
withdraw and keep to himself.
But now he speaks up and
asserts himself more.
>>I feel I'm more sociable
as far as my relationships.
I'm able to kind of build
a rapport a lot quicker
with other people.
Because beforehand,
I just seemed
like I was in a cocoon--
didn't want to break out,
didn't want to talk to anybody.
I noticed I was
able to focus more.
I was able to
concentrate, sleep better.
I was able to understand what I
needed to do and how to do it.
After neurofeedback,
I never had to take
any medications or
herbal supplements.
>>And I've definitely
seen a difference, I mean,
compared to the herbal
medications and other things
that he was trying.
It seems like this has
really made an impact.
>>Yeah, I found neurofeedback
to be a positive experience,
and I would definitely
recommend it to anyone.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: That was a
huge study, wasn't it,
with the PTSD patients?
>>OTHMER: Yes, and--
>>LISA: Ongoing as well, right?
>>OTHMER: It's still ongoing.
And by now, it's well over 500
cases that have been tracked.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
And people, just
so we know, what
is the website for people
to be able to find that?
>>OTHMER: That's
homecomingforveterans.org.
And actually, we have
an ongoing program
where we train veterans'
brains at no cost.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
>>OTHMER: And this is
a nationwide network
of participating practitioners
that are involved.
>>LISA: The more that we
can do to get the word out
about that is great.
So now we've changed
our scenery here a bit
to demonstrate some of the
equipment, which is so fun.
Now, I've done this
program, but I really
wanted to show
what it looks like.
So tell us what we're looking
at here, in this screen.
>>OTHMER: Yes.
Well, first of all, on
the clinician screen here,
we're showing what the
clinician is looking at,
which is the EEG spectrum
from low frequency to high.
And the yellow peaks
show momentary peaks
in the activity.
And about the only thing
that we can expect the viewer
to get out of this
is to kind of get
a sense of the
dynamics of the EEG--
how rapidly things are changing.
It's constantly adjusting.
>>LISA: So what's
causing this bright view
and the entire screen
to change are electrodes
that are hooked up--
just put on your head.
>>OTHMER: Right.
Right.
So we're seeing the
boundary-- the border
of the image close in, which
is the signal to the brain.
That's where the information
is encoded from the EEG.
It's very low frequency
information, in this case,
because that's what we're
keying in on in these-- well,
in most of our work.
But principally in
these trauma cases,
we're working at very
low EEG frequencies.
And so the information, very
slowly, but the brain still
gets it.
And so the outline here
reflects that EEG amplitude.
This signal here is
actually the raw signal
in the conventional EEG band.
And the practitioner's
looking at that
to make sure that everything
is OK and as it should be.
It doesn't otherwise contain
very much useful information
to the clinician.
>>LISA: So this is
a feedback loop.
So if my brain is sending
a lower frequency,
then the picture
starts to shrink.
But if it's sending a
more coherent frequency,
then the picture
starts to widen.
Is that a good way of saying it?
>>OTHMER: At this
low frequency, yes,
coherence is involved
and all of that
to construct the EEG
that we're watching.
But actually, at this
very low frequency,
it's almost like watching
the swells of the ocean.
It's just the signal moves
up and down very slowly.
And here, the brain
cares about that signal
because that signal
is so important
to its own organization.
That's why it
matters to the brain.
And that's why it's so acutely
interested, even though we
as observers say
it's so slow, how
can the brain get
anything out of that?
But it does because it's
the brain's own dance,
and that's why the
brain is interested.
>>LISA: So is the signal coming
from the computer to the brain,
or is it going from the
brain to the program?
Or is it both?
>>OTHMER: It's both.
So the signal from the brain
is processed by the computer.
And then by virtue
of the imagery,
the information is also being
conveyed back to the brain.
So that's the feedback loop.
>>LISA: Feedback loop.
>>OTHMER: Right.
>>LISA: I understand.
OK.
>>OTHMER: Right.
And now, the brain
operates that way
with lots of internal
feedback loops,
and we've just
added another one.
>>LISA: So this is a rewarding
screen right here, right--
where the brain sees the
journey and the brightness
and goes through the path
and the brain right now
is receiving feedback of
a rewarding, pleasurable,
enjoyable frequency, right?
>>OTHMER: Right.
Right.
>>LISA: Then when it starts
to shrink, as it's doing now,
and your view becomes narrow
and you can't see as much,
that's a non-rewarding--
>>OTHMER: Well, a
slight iteration
on what you're saying.
>>LISA: Great.
>>OTHMER: In this very
low frequency training,
we no longer think in
terms of good and bad.
It simply is.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: This is simply
a modulating signal.
It's just like high
tides, low tide.
One isn't better than
the other, right?
It's just part of
the same phenomenon.
So we're looking at the ebb
and flow of brain activity
and it's not easy to assign
goodness or badness to it.
If we do this with a
traumatized person,
yes, there's dysregulation
stuck in there
somewhere-- reflected
in there somewhere.
But we don't know the good
part from the bad part.
It's all wrapped up together.
So the brain sorts it
out and basically works
on that signal in
this feedback loop.
>>LISA: Is this
what dysregulation
would look like when it narrows
down and it stops traveling?
>>OTHMER: You're thinking
good and bad again.
>>LISA: I am.
Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: Right.
No, it just simply-- the signal
is low amplitude right now,
and a few minutes
later, it'll be large.
And it simply is.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: But the signal is
guiding the brain's dance,
and it's sort of informing
the brain-- the brain has
this a-ha experience.
It says, oh, that's me.
That is my dance.
>>LISA: I see.
>>OTHMER: And so the brain
engages with that signal,
interacts with that
signal, and tries
to control the signal,
because it realizes
it's responsible
for that signal.
So that's the nature
of what this is about.
And you can think about
this in precise analogy
to how we work with life itself,
so that when you pick up a rake
to rake the leaves, your brain
assumes ownership of that rake.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: Or when you pick
up the tennis racquet,
the brain immediately
forms a vision
of where the sweet spot is.
And you can carry the
tennis racquet around
and your brain is always
is carrying with it
the knowledge of the sweet spot.
It just takes responsibility
for that, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>OTHMER: That's just
the way the brain works.
And when the brain sees its own
dance, it does the same thing.
It just takes control.
And that taking
control of that signal
is the path back
to good regulation.
>>LISA: I see.
So now these programs are
pre-built with a specific ebb
and flow and rhythms
to them, right?
But are they
interactive, as well,
where my brain would be
changing the screen at all?
>>OTHMER: In various ways, yes.
We have more complicated games.
There are sometimes
dozens of variables
that are being altered in
the game as your EEG changes.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>OTHMER: And you're
not even aware,
at the conscious level, of
all these things going on.
But because the brain
knows it's doing it,
it picks up on these things.
You might ignore them
consciously-- in fact,
we distract people with
movies-- but there's
all sorts of things going
on that the brain picks up
because it's doing it.
>>LISA: So it could be just
a scape of an ocean-- ebb
and flow of an ocean.
We have a couple
of others in here,
as well, that you can
show the example of.
And so in the case
of-- and it depends
on what the person's
individual like is.
I resonated with butterflies
on my particular one.
This one is more of a space,
galaxy type of experience.
>>OTHMER: Yeah.
>>LISA: And so there's
things moving in it.
Now, let me ask you as
we're watching this,
how does this help with someone
where they have maybe sleep
issues or they're trying to
prevent themselves from waking
up in the middle the night,
they have disrupted sleep,
they have night sweats--
those types of things.
How would something like this
regulate that in the brain?
>>OTHMER: Well, it's
the same process.
The quality of sleep is
actually a good indicator to us
whether we're doing our job.
Because at night,
the brain has the job
entirely to itself of
carrying you through the night
and giving you a
good night's sleep.
In the daytime, there
are things you can do.
You can have coffee
and so forth.
You can manipulate your state.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: But at night,
the brain is on its own.
So that's where we can tell
whether we've done our job.
So if we have trained the brain
to self-regulate appropriately,
the first signature
of that success
will be a good night's sleep.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>OTHMER: So we almost
always ask about
sleep because it's such a
critical indicator to us
of where the brain
is going wrong.
Do you have trouble
going to sleep?
with frequent waking
and then have trouble
going back to sleep?
Do you wake up too
early and then--
all these sorts of
things matter to tell us
exactly how that brain
needs to be trained.
>>LISA: What about nightmares?
Can EEG help with
something like nightmares?
>>OTHMER: Yeah, yeah.
Now, that's another instance
of the brain really going out
of control.
Now, it turns out
nightmares are exquisitely
sensitive to this training.
So we can basically
categorically say
that if a person has nightmares,
we haven't done our job yet.
In other words, we should
get rid of nightmares.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>OTHMER: So very high
success rate for nightmares.
Now, with veterans, it's
a little bit different.
We talk about night
terrors there.
Sorry, not night terrors--
nocturnal flashbacks.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>OTHMER: I misspoke.
Nocturnal flashbacks.
And they need to be
distinguished from nightmares.
So there's both issues
involved with veterans.
And the nocturnal
flashbacks are a little bit
like the daytime flashbacks,
but they occur at night.
The nightmares are
another phenomenon.
And fortunately, we
can deal with both.
>>LISA: Amazing.
What about pain, when
there's pain that's
caused from a specific, maybe,
injury-- area in the back
is inflamed or a
disk is bulging?
Can this actually help
with the response?
How does it work with pain?
>>OTHMER: It's interesting
because in the case
of chronic pain, we
are often dealing
with a true physical loss.
>>LISA: Right.
>>OTHMER: --a true
neuronal loss.
Here, we've really
who lost something.
So in the spinal column, there
could be the actual destruction
of tiny little interneurons.
And that leaves us with
a limited capability
of doing anything about it.
So what is left to us?
What's left to us is the
judgment that the brain makes
about that pain--
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: --which it's
still in charge of, right?
The messages are coming
up and saying pain.
>>LISA: Right.
>>OTHMER: But the
brain can still
choose how to alert you
to that state of pain.
That's still modulatable.
And so that central
mechanism of pain regulation
is still available to us.
So we can help with chronic pain
even in the most extreme cases.
Now, how far we can go with
that, that's a broad spectrum.
>>LISA: Right.
You need to be safe because
if it's a major source of pain
because something is
severely injured, then
you don't want to cut the
signal off completely,
because the body's trying
to tell the brain something,
right?
>>OTHMER: The signal is
always still coming up.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: The question is--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>OTHMER: The question
is, what assignment
does the brain give to it?
So yes.
We haven't actually
gotten rid of the pain.
The pain signal is coming
up loud and clear, right?
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: It's just, how
does the brain deal with it?
And so you might
say in that sense
we haven't dealt
with the pain at all.
What we have dealt
with is your sense
of pain-- your sense
of victimization--
that we've given
you-- hopefully,
if we succeed--
mastery over the pain.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Wow.
>>OTHMER: The pain still exists.
>>LISA: Of course.
>>OTHMER: And so
if you inquire, it
says yes, my foot still
hurts or my back still
hurts or whatever, but
it doesn't bother me.
Because the mind
has-- now the brain--
>>LISA: Right.
>>OTHMER: The mind
brain-- the brain mind
has risen above that pain.
So that is our hope
with chronic pain.
It's not to expunge it,
because that, indeed,
is not possible for us.
I mean, sometimes
we get rid of pain,
but in these extreme
cases of chronic pain,
no, we don't get rid of it.
But mastery of the pain,
it may still be possible.
>>LISA: What I discovered
through the brain trauma
that I had was it took me about
20 sessions to get my brain
to feed back the
correct signal strength
than the rest of the brain was.
So how long would
it take someone,
and does it last permanently?
In my case, I needed to go
back every year or two just
to check to see-- as you
would any type of check up--
if the signal is still
responding accurately.
Does this last?
>>OTHMER: Well, with
some chronic pain cases,
we find that they actually
need to take the equipment home
and train every once in a while.
Some people with
chronic pain who
have real sleep issues,
which is common,
they may train every day.
But it's worth it, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>OTHMER: If a
half hour session--
>>LISA: The
alternative is-- yeah.
>>OTHMER: --with the machine
can give you a night's sleep,
you're willing to pay that
price rather than staring
at the ceiling in
pain all night, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>OTHMER: And so we have
had people who've basically
been on a daily diet
of neurofeedback
just to manage their pain.
And they get hours of
pain free existence.
So we see phenomena all across
the map with chronic pain.
>>LISA: What about with--
in the case of addictions
where those tend to take
over or control the mind?
Does this help with addictions?
>>OTHMER: This is a huge story.
The addiction must be seen
as a brain based problem.
If it doesn't start as
a brain based problem,
it becomes a brain
based problem.
>>LISA: OK.
Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: And so it needs
a brain based remedy.
Whatever else is needed, it
also needs a brain based remedy.
And we do wonderfully
with addictions.
Again, we need to
train the brain out
of that state of
dependency on the drug.
And the fact that we succeed
is illustrated by the fact
that many people actually
even lose their craving.
Now, in the past, in
conventional treatments,
success constitutes just
being able to stay sober
and whatever-- not use.
But if you ask the person
would they prefer to use,
the answer is yes, right?
>>LISA: Ah.
>>OTHMER: It's not like we've
overcome the addiction in that
sense--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>OTHMER: --by and large.
So it's just that we've
given them the strength
to live a different life.
And now, that's a
success in a way.
But how much better
if we actually
get the person to the
point where he can say--
>>LISA: No.
>>OTHMER: --no, I
don't need the drug.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>OTHMER: In fact, the drug
is no longer part of my life.
>>LISA: It no longer
has power over me.
>>OTHMER: No longer
And you see, when the
brain wants the drug,
that's very hard to resist.
>>LISA: It's a
chemical firing that--
>>OTHMER: Right.
>>LISA: Right.
>>OTHMER: And the brain
will have its way.
It's very hard to--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>OTHMER: Willpower
is overrated.
If willpower is all you've
got, then be my guest.
Rely on it.
But it's not all we've got.
We can train the brain.
>>LISA: Yes.
That's why they say
willpower doesn't often work.
>>OTHMER: Right.
>>LISA: Because it is powerful
will, in the wrong direction
sometimes.
>>OTHMER: Well, and
if we tell people
that they must depend on
willpower and then they fail,
then we've also given
them a sense of failure.
It says no, we need to give
people every opportunity
to succeed, and that
means brain training.
>>LISA: So this
could also have to do
with food addictions
and weight loss,
essentially, because
you stop the addiction
for certain foods or bad foods?
How would that work?
>>OTHMER: Yeah.
So appetite regulation is a
big part of the food issue--
just basically getting to
the point of just regulating
your appetite.
And so we have people, they
go to restaurant and say,
I actually didn't feel
like ordering dessert.
What happened?
Who is the person who
drove by the bakery
today without
stopping for donuts?
Who is the person that
passed up on desert?
They don't recognize themselves.
Their brain is now
in a different place.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Although they still
observe, they don't crave.
>>OTHMER: No, no, no.
It's not by willpower.
It's their brain is now
in a different place.
Their brain has
now appropriately
regulated appetite.
And now these things
become non issues.
The cravings disappear
and so forth.
>>LISA: The signals go
into a different direction?
>>OTHMER: Yeah.
>>LISA: So those patterns or
those bundles actually break up
and new habits and
patterns and bundles form?
>>OTHMER: Right.
And since we're talking
about new habits,
yes, it may take awhile to get
those new habits consolidated.
So you may see a quick impact
such as not wanting desert--
>>LISA: --in the beginning?
>>OTHMER: --in the beginning.
>>LISA: OK.
>>OTHMER: But to
consolidate that and make
that a new habit, it's
still going to take a while.
>>LISA: And lasting.
OK
>>OTHMER: Yeah.
>>LISA: Now once again
about the program,
the computer or--
say the technician
wants to help someone with
this appetite control.
So can you enter that type
of program into the computer?
Is that how that works from
the practitioner's perspective?
I'm just curious.
>>OTHMER: Well, OK.
Here, the brain is
in our favorite.
The brain functions as
an integrated whole.
It's amazing just how
intricately everything
is intertwined.
So it turns out we have
a very basic approach
that if your
problem is appetite,
it's going to help that.
And if your problem
is addiction,
it's going to help that.
But fundamentally,
it's one approach.
>>LISA: Hmm.
>>OTHMER: So what happens is
there is individualization
of the training, but
it depends on how
you respond to the training.
And then the training
will differentiate
in these different ways,
but it'll differentiate not
according to whether you have
migraines or night terrors
or whatever.
It'll differentiate according
to who you are as a person.
And it will go according to
the character of your brain,
not just depending
on what is failing.
So it's that kind of
individualization.
So this becomes very
personalized training.
>>LISA: Tell me a little
bit about migraines.
You just mentioned migraines.
Could this help with migraines?
>>OTHMER: Very much so.
In fact, if I were to list the
conditions in-- rank ordered
according to how
well we do with them,
migraines would be
just about at the top.
And people really need to know
this because a lot of people
are sort of content to live with
a certain level of migraines
in their lives and
they accept that.
Well, as horrible
as migraines are,
I would not find
that acceptable.
These people need to know
that there's an alternative.
And now, we tend to see the more
difficult end of the spectrum--
people who have spent 10
to 30 years with migraines
and they're just tired
of it and whatever
and they're happy
to find this remedy.
And so we know we
can succeed even
with the most intractable
cases of migraine, which
means the easier
part of the spectrum
should be easier to deal with.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>OTHMER: We even had
a case of a person who
had a multi-decadal year
history of migraines.
And from the first session on,
never had another migraine.
>>LISA: Really?
I was going to ask
you how long it
takes for that to be effective.
>>OTHMER: Well, it
made a difference
from the first session on.
Now, she still
needed 40 sessions
to consolidate the training.
>>LISA: Oh.
Oh, I see.
>>OTHMER: Right.
It's not like, OK, one
session, we're done.
>>LISA: Right.
>>OTHMER: She still
had 40 sessions.
But never in that time did
she have another migraine.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So what does something
like this cost?
Does insurance cover it?
How does it work?
>>OTHMER: Insurance is
getting-- is getting better,
but insurance is
oriented towards saying
no, and so forth.
And this is going to take a
while before the insurance
realizes that we really
solve people's problems
and it's really cost effective.
It's more cost effective
to solve people's problems
than to keep saying no.
Because what happens is
in the course of life,
with what we call dysregulation,
what we're dealing with here
just gets worse.
And pretty soon, you're dealing
with serious medical issues.
Whereas if you had taken care
of the problem of dysregulation
when it was manageable--
>>LISA: Ah, I see.
>>OTHMER: --then the
entire trajectory
in life-- across life, this
lifespan would've been better.
So I don't--
>>LISA: You can still
affect it if it's
in a chronic stage-- you
can still make a difference?
>>OTHMER: Yeah.
>>LISA: And are
there measures being
made towards getting the
insurance companies more
onboarded?
Some of them do cover it
under mental health, right?
>>OTHMER: We've not made
insurance companies a priority.
And perhaps the
time is coming when
they should be brought
into the picture.
Because they've taken,
historically, such an
anti position.
But I think the
times are changing.
And the time is coming
when-- it has happened
which insurance companies
and hospitals and so
forth are approaching us.
>>LISA: That's good.
That's very good.
>>OTHMER: Yeah.
That's good news.
>>LISA: Very helpful.
Now, you have a new book
out called "Brian's Legacy."
And this is the story
of your son, yes?
>>OTHMER: This is the story
of our son's struggles
with his epilepsy.
And it's remarkable in the
sense that most of the book
is actually his story
in his own words.
It's his own journal.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>OTHMER: It's his college
years in which he describes
how he relates to
his own conditions--
his own increasing
mastery of his condition.
Now, ultimately, we lost him
in his senior year of college.
So ultimately, we never finally
got the seizures under control,
despite the medications,
despite the neurofeedback.
He was still
wrestling with that.
But as a person, he
really developed,
and that was mainly
with the neurofeedback.
And so that story
is-- so I would--
>>LISA: So his quality
of life was better?
>>OTHMER: Oh, yeah, yeah.
It really made a
human being out of him
to where he could
make friends and was
great to live with and so forth.
But the book, I think, is to
be particularly recommended
to parents who are dealing
with their own problem children
or who've had their own
difficulties growing up,
of this kind.
>>LISA: Just to talk about
the solution oriented approach
to EEG.
>>OTHMER: Yes.
And now it looks like-- we call
it "Brian's Legacy" because we
feel like Brian got
us into the field.
And now it looks like
we're heading to the point
where the self-regulation
technologies will play--
in the future-- play a major
role in bending the cost
curve of medicine,
and also just simply
improving the quality of life.
There's so much suffering in
the world which is unnecessary.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, we've talked
about everything
from the ADD, ADHD
to appetite control.
We haven't even touched on
peak performance and memory
and focus, because it also
helps with that, as well.
There's so many things
that EEG and neurofeedback
can help with.
And I'm really glad
that you're here
to explain it, to
demonstrate it,
to show us how
the program works,
and to show that it's such a
solution for so many things.
So thanks for exposing
us to this world.
I appreciate it.
>>OTHMER: It's
wonderful to be here.
>>LISA: Great to have you here.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Doctor Siegfried Othmer
or share it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]